Smallpox is a brick-shaped virus
that is transmitted
from one person to another,
either through direct contact
or by inhalation.
An infected person exhales
thousands of virus particles in each breath
and inhaling even a few
can result in virus infection.
A single virus,
called a verion,
lodges in the throat
or upper respiratory tract.
The wet mucus membrane binds
with the outer envelop of the virus
releasing the inner core materials
of the verion into the cell.
The core of the verion
contains the genetic material,
or DNA, of the virus.
Viral DNA released into the cell
becomes a factory for the production
of viral proteins
and new smallpox vireons.
These new veriola viruses
are eventually released back into the airway
where they are exhaled into the air
that other people breathe.
Over time, you become
more and more contagious.
Vireons not exhaled may
be attacked by macrophages,
one of the body’s protection units.
The macrophage removes the virus
through the lymphatic system,
which also becomes infected.
The lymphatics dump waste
into the circulatory system,
which is how the virus moves
into the arteries.
From there, it is sent to all parts of the body.
The virus travels through smaller
and smaller arteries
until it reaches the capillaries
just below the skin.
The variola virus infects
the cells of the skin,
beginning at its deepest layer.
Infected cells die and disintegrate.
Dead cells collected in the spaces between
living skin cells,
forming pockets or vesicles.
Eventually, a rash appears on the
skin’s surface over the vesicles.
As more materials collect,
the vesicles grow.
Two days later
the skin has developed pustules
that are recognizable as
pox at the surface.
The pustules begin to dry out
a few days after that
and their rounded tops become flattened
and then slightly depressed at the center.
Continued drying leads to scab formation.
The scab falls away two to four
weeks after infection,
leaving a small scar
or pox mark.